Draft: Install Nagios on Debian 12 & Ubuntu 22.04 (#7325)
linode/docs: docs/guides/uptime/monitoring/install-nagios-core-4-5-debian-12-ubuntu-24/index.md

- **Broken dependencies**: If your system has conflicting packages or unmet dependencies, `apt` usually suggests a fix. To isolate the problem, install packages one at a time:
    sudo apt install nagios4
    sudo apt install nagios-plugins-contrib
    sudo apt install monitoring-plugins
    sudo apt install nagios-nrpe-plugin
Then you can tell which package is causing issues.
Use this checklist to confirm your install steps or isolate issues during setup.

{{< details "Quick Troubleshooting Checklist" >}}
- [ ] Refresh package cache: `sudo apt update`
- [ ] Search for Nagios packages: `apt search nagios`
- [ ] Fix broken dependencies: `sudo apt --fix-broken install`
- [ ] Resolve APT lock errors: remove lock files if no other process is running
- [ ] Check for missing packages in `/etc/apt/sources.list`
- [ ] Use `sudo` for all install commands
- [ ] Verify network connectivity or switch mirrors
- [ ] Install packages one at a time to isolate issues:
  - `sudo apt install nagios4`
  - `sudo apt install nagios-plugins-contrib`
  - `sudo apt install monitoring-plugins`
  - `sudo apt install nagios-nrpe-plugin`
{{< /details >}}

> 

Author: ```suggestion

This guide intentionally omits manual compilation steps. For contributors needing source-based installs or plugin customization, refer to the [Nagios Core Installation Guide](https://support.nagios.com/kb/article/nagios-core-installing-nagios-core-from-source-96.html)
```

relations:
    platform:
        key: install-nagios-monitoring
        keywords:
            - distribution: Debian 12 & Ubuntu 22.04
---

Nagios is an open-source monitoring tool widely used for tracking server uptime, service health, and infrastructure performance, with status reporting through a web interface.

This guide covers installation of Nagios Core 4, including updated packages, authentication practices, and contributor-friendly formatting on an Akamai Compute Instance (formerly Linode) running Debian or Ubuntu. If you are replacing another monitoring tool, see the instructions in the [**Before You Begin** section below](#before-you-begin). Configuration files define what is monitored and when alerts are triggered.

On Debian 12 and Ubuntu 22.04, the Nagios dashboard is typically accessible at `http://<your-server-ip>/nagios4`. Older systems may use `/nagios` instead. This guide assumes the default path used by the `nagios4` package.

## Before You Begin

You should have:

- A Compute Instance (formerly Linode) running Debian 12 or Ubuntu 22.04
- A non-root user with `sudo` privileges

> - LAMP stack installed (Linux, Apache, MariaDB/MySQL, PHP). Install and configure a LAMP (Linux, Apache, MySQL, and PHP) stack.

Author: ```suggestion
- Install and configure a LAMP stack (Linux, Apache, MariaDB/MySQL, PHP). This is required for Nagios's web interface and plugin support. [How to Install and Configure a LAMP Stack](https://techdocs.akamai.com/get-started-cloud-computing/docs/install-lamp-api)
```

- '[Nagios Plugins](https://nagios-plugins.org/)'
- '[Nagios Installation Guide](https://support.nagios.com/kb/article/nagios-core-installing-nagios-core-from-source-96.html)'

relations:
    platform:
        key: install-nagios-monitoring
        keywords:
            - distribution: Debian 12 & Ubuntu 22.04
---

Nagios is an open-source monitoring tool widely used for tracking server uptime, service health, and infrastructure performance, with status reporting through a web interface.

This guide covers installation of Nagios Core 4, including updated packages, authentication practices, and contributor-friendly formatting on an Akamai Compute Instance (formerly Linode) running Debian or Ubuntu. If you are replacing another monitoring tool, see the instructions in the [**Before You Begin** section below](#before-you-begin). Configuration files define what is monitored and when alerts are triggered.

On Debian 12 and Ubuntu 22.04, the Nagios dashboard is typically accessible at `http://<your-server-ip>/nagios4`. Older systems may use `/nagios` instead. This guide assumes the default path used by the `nagios4` package.

## Before You Begin

You should have:

> - An Akamai Compute Instance (formerly Linode) running Debian 12 or Ubuntu 22.04

Author: ```suggestion
- A Compute Instance (formerly Linode) running Debian 12 or Ubuntu 22.04
```

- A non-root user with `sudo` privileges
- LAMP stack installed (Linux, Apache, MariaDB/MySQL, PHP). Install and configure a LAMP (Linux, Apache, MySQL, and PHP) stack.
    [How to Install and Configure a LAMP Stack](https://techdocs.akamai.com/get-started-cloud-computing/docs/install-lamp-api)
- Firewall configured to allow HTTP/HTTPS access

If you are switching from another monitoring system (e.g., Zabbix, Prometheus, Icinga), prior to installation:

- **Stop and disable the previous service**: Use `systemctl stop` and `systemctl disable` to prevent conflicts.
- **Remove conflicting packages**: Check for overlapping plugins or agents that may interfere with Nagios.
- **Clean up legacy configuration files**: Look in `/etc/`, `/usr/local/`, and `/var/log/` for residual files from previous tools.
- **Review firewall and port settings**: Nagios may require different ports than your previous tool (e.g., 5666, 80/443).
- **Backup any relevant data**: If you're migrating alerts or host definitions, preserve what you need before uninstalling.

> ## System Preparation

Author: Add, Finalize to the beginning of the title.

Update your system:

>     sudo apt update && sudo apt upgrade -y

Author: If this command fails or your SSH connection times out, your instance may have booted without an IPv4address. This is a known edge case in Ubuntu 22.04 cloud images. 
Note: If you see only `inet6` entries and no `inet` (IPv4) address, the see [IPv4](#ipv4-recovery-guide). Once this is resolved, update your system with the previous commands.

> Install the required packages for Apache, MariaDB, and PHP:

Author: Remove this instruction since LAMP Stack has already covered this.

    sudo apt install apache2 mariadb-server php libapache2-mod-php php-mysql -y

## Create Nagios User and Group

>  Create a user and `nagcmd` user group:

Author: ```suggestion
 Creating a dedicated `nagios` user and `nagcmd` user group ensures that Nagios runs securely and can execute commands via the web interface:
```

    sudo useradd nagios

>     sudo groupadd nagcmd

Author: ```suggestion
    sudo groupadd nagcmd
```
Verify User and Group Setup
id nagios
getent group nagcmd

Add the user and Apache2 user to the `nagcmd` user group:

    sudo usermod -aG nagcmd nagios && sudo usermod -aG nagcmd www-data

> ## Install Nagios and Plugins

Author: ```suggestion
## Install Nagios and Plugins
```

> 

Author: Will add the link to the Nagios Alert Setup on Debian 12 and Ubuntu 22.04 when that doc is complete.

> You can use a one-liner install:

Author: ```suggestion
Use the following command to install Nagios Core and its essential plugins. These packages come from the default Debian and Ubuntu repositories that support basic monitoring workflows.
```

    sudo apt install nagios4 nagios-plugins-contrib monitoring-plugins nagios-nrpe-plugin -y

> 

Author: `nagios4` installs binaries but not a systemd unit.

> If it fails, look for clues in the terminal output:

Author: Move these TS issues to a separate section

    apt search nagios

- Missing package: One of the listed packages may not be available in your distro's repositories.

Or any of these common issues:

- Permission issues: If you're not using `sudo`, you might see permission denied.

> - Network: A broken internet connection or unreachable mirror can cause download failures.

Author: ```suggestion
- Network: A broken internet connection or unreachable mirror can prevent downloads. Try pinging a known host or switching mirrors.
```

- Broken dependencies: If your system has conflicting packages or unmet dependencies, `apt` will usually suggest a fix. Then isolate the problem by installing packages one at a time:
    sudo apt install nagios4
    sudo apt install nagios-plugins-contrib
    sudo apt install monitoring-plugins
    sudo apt install nagios-nrpe-plugin
Then you can tell which package is causing issues.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
Use this checklist to confirm your install steps or isolate issues during setup.

{{< details "Quick Troubleshooting Checklist" >}}
- [ ] Refresh package cache: `sudo apt update`
- [ ] Search for Nagios packages: `apt search nagios`
- [ ] Fix broken dependencies: `sudo apt --fix-broken install`
- [ ] Resolve APT lock errors: remove lock files if no other process is running
- [ ] Check for missing packages in `/etc/apt/sources.list`
- [ ] Use `sudo` for all install commands
- [ ] Verify network connectivity or switch mirrors
- [ ] Install packages one at a time to isolate issues:
  - `sudo apt install nagios4`
  - `sudo apt install nagios-plugins-contrib`
  - `sudo apt install monitoring-plugins`
  - `sudo apt install nagios-nrpe-plugin`
{{< /details >}}
```

## Configure Apache Authentication

Nagios authentication can be configured at varying levels of complexity. Use the basic setup shown below, and move on to the advanced configuration if you find your environment requires group-based access, IPv6 support or broader directory matching.

This configuration enforces dual-layer access control for Nagios: users must authenticate via Digest credentials and originate from explicitly allowed IP addresses. The `cmd.cgi` block restricts command execution to authenticated users--by default, only `nagiosadmin` user you'll create below--ensuring that system-level actions are gated by both identity and network trust. Changes to the `<Files>` section further ensure only users with explicit permissions can send commands via the Nagios interface.

1. Create A Digest-authenticated user

    Using the `-c ` flag creates the file if it doesn't exist.

        sudo htdigest -c /etc/nagios4/htdigest.users "Nagios4" nagiosadmin

1. Update Apache Configuration

>     Open `/etc/nagios4/apache2/conf` in your preferred editor and make the following changes:

Author: ```suggestion
    Open `/etc/nagios4/apache2/conf` in your preferred editor with elevated privileges (e.g., `sudo nano`) and make the following changes: (Note: If `/etc/apache2/conf-available/nagios4.conf` doesn't exist it will show `[ New File ]` just above the commands line which means you're are creating it manually. Copy the config block below and paste it in, then use `Ctrl + O` and exit with `Ctrl + X`.)
```

        Inside `<DirectoryMatch>` block:

1. Comment out the IP-based access line (optional if using firewall rules):

        #Require ip ::1/128 fc00::/7 fe80::/10 10.0.0.0/8 127.0.0.0/8 169.254.0.0/16 172.16.0.0/12 192.168.0.0.16

    IP filtering is often handled at the network level. This line can be commented out unless you're relying solely on Apache for access control.

1. Simplified Access Control for `cmd.cgi`

>     This configuration enforces authentication and IP-based filtering for the Nagios command interface using a streamlined `<Files "cmd.cgi">` block. It's designed for clarity and ease of setup, especially for contributors who don't need group-based access or multi-realm authentication.

Author: ```suggestion
   The following `<Files "cmd.cgi">` block provides an example of a simplified, file-specific access control method designed for clarity with the Nagios command interface. It's ideal for contributors who prefer minimal setup or who are validating access to `cmd.cgi` directly.
   
   If you've already configured a broader `<DirectoryMatch>` block (e.g., for /usr/lib/nagios4/cgi-bin/`), this example acts as a targeted override. It streamlines authentication and IP filtering for just the command interface, and may require commenting out overlapping `Require ip` lines to avoid conflicts--especially if you're shifting access control to the file level or relying on firewall rules.
```

    Edit /etc/nagios4/apache2.conf:

    <Files "cmd.cgi">

        AuthType Digest
        AuthName "Nagios4"
        AuthDigestProvider file
        AuthUserFile "/etc/nagios4/htdigest.users"
        Require valid-user

>         Allow from 127.0.0.1 <your-trusted-ip>

Author: ```suggestion
        Require from 127.0.0.1 <your-trusted-ip>
```

Author: This reflects the Apache 2.4+ syntax, which is default in both Debian 12 and Ubuntu 22.04.

    </Files>

>     {{< caution >}}

Author: ```suggestion
```

>     Replace <your-trusted-ip> with your actual IP address. Avoid hardcoding contributor IPs in PRs.

Author: ```suggestion
```

    {{< /caution >}}

>     For advanced scenarios--such as managing access by user groups, supporting IPv6 ranges, or customizing multiple directory paths--refer to the full [Advanced Apache](#advanced-apache-configuration) configuration example below.

Author: ```suggestion
    For advanced scenarios--such as managing access by user groups, supporting IPv6 ranges, or customizing multiple directory paths--see the full [Advanced Apache Configuration](#advanced-apache-configuration) section below.
```

> 1. Enable Apache Modules and Restart

Author: ```suggestion
1. Validate and Enable Apache Modules and Restart
```

>     Enable require modules:

Author: ```suggestion
    Enable required modules:
```

>         sudo a2enmod rewrite cgi auth_digest authz_groupfile

Author: ```suggestion
        sudo a2enmod rewrite
        sudo a2enmod cgi
        sudo a2enmod auth_digest
        sudo a2enmod authz_groupfile
```

> 1. Restart Apache:

Author: ```suggestion
1. Restart Apache to apply changes:
```

        sudo systemctl restart apache2

## Advanced Apache Configuration

> Use this version if you need group-based access, IPv6 support, and broader directory matching across multiple Nagios paths.

Author: ```suggestion
Use this version if you are managing group-based multi-access, enforcing IPv6 restrictions, or customizing Nagios interface paths. For simpler setups, refer to the basic configuration [Configure Apache Authentication](#configure-apache-authentication) section above.
```

1. Update `<DirectoryMatch>` Block

>     <DirectoryMatch (/usr/share/nagios4/htdocs|/usr/lib/cgi-bin/nagios4|/etc/nagios4/stylesheets)>

Author: ```suggestion
    <DirectoryMatch "^(/usr/share/nagios4/htdocs|/usr/lib/cgi-bin/nagios4|/etc/nagios4/stylesheets)">
```

        #Require ip ::1/128 fc00::/7 fe80::/10 10.0.0.0/8 127.0.0.0/8 169.254.0.0/16 172.16.0.0/12 192.168.0.0/16
        <Files "cmd.cgi">
            AuthDigestDomain "Nagios4"
            AuthDigestProvider file
            AuthUserFile "/etc/nagios4/htdigest.users"
            AuthGroupFile "/etc/group"
            AuthName "Nagios4"
            AuthType Digest

>             Allow from 127.0.0.1 198.51.100.0

Author: ```suggestion
            Require from 127.0.0.1 198.51.100.0
```

            #Require all granted
            Require valid-user
        </Files>
    </DirectoryMatch>

    {{< note >}}

    Replace `198.51.100.0` with the IP address(es) you trust. You can find your current IP by running `who` or checking your SSH session details.

    {{< /note>}}

1. Enable Nagios CGI Authentication

    Open `/etc/nagios4/cgi.cfg`, and set:

        use-authentication=1

1. Enable Apache Modules and Restart

        sudo a2enmod rewrite

        sudo a2enmod cgi

        sudo a2enmod auth_digest

        sudo a2enmod authz_groupfile

>     {{< note>}}

Author: ```suggestion
```

> Restart the Apache service to apply changes:

Author: ```suggestion
1. Restart the Apache service to apply changes:
```

    sudo systemctl restart apache2

{{< /note >}}

## Monitor Hosts and Services

- Use the left sidebar in Nagios to view Hosts and Services.
- Add new hosts by editing files in `/etc/nagios4/conf.d/`.

> - Restart Nagios after changes:

Author: ```suggestion
- Restart Nagios after changes:
```

        sudo systemctl restart nagios4

## Access Nagios

1. After installation, navigate to your Nagios dashboard by opening a browser and visiting:

    http://<your-server-ip>/nagios4

    {{< note >}}

    On Debian 12 and Ubuntu 22.04, the default path is `/nagios4`.
    If you're referencing older guides or maintaining legacy systems, the path may be `/nagios`.

    {{< /note >}}

    You'll be prompted to log in using the credentials set during installation.

1. After logging into the Nagios web interface above, you can view system status by navigating to:

>     /nagios/cgi-bin/status.cgi

Author: ```suggestion
```

    This endpoint powers the **Host and Service Overview**, showing real-time health for all configured hosts and services.

>     {{< note >}}

Author: ```suggestion
    {{< important>}}
```

    In the left-hand menu, look for **Host Detail** or **Service Detail** to access this view directly.

    {{< /note >}}

1. To explore more detailed metrics or troubleshoot specific alerts:

    - Use the **Service Detail** view to inspect individual service checks, including last check time, status output, and retry attempts.
    - Click on any host name in the **Host Detail** view to drill down to associated services, notifications, and performance graphs (if enabled).

> 1. If you've configured email notifications or escalation policies, you can verify their status under:

Author: ```suggestion
1. If you've configured email notifications or escalation policies, you can verify their status by clicking on a host name under **Current Status > Problems > Hosts (Unhandled)** or a service under **Current Status > Problems > Services (Unhandled). Scroll down to the **Additional Info** section to view:
- Notification Commands
- Contract Groups
- Last Notification Sent
- Whether notifications are *enabled* or *disabled*
```

    /nagios/cgi-bin/extinfo.cgi?type=3

    This endpoint displays *Notification Commands* and *Contact Groups*, helping you confirm that alerts are routed correctly.

    {{< note >}}

>     For security, ensure your Nagios dashboard is only accessible over a secure connection (HTTPS) and protected by strong credentials. Consider restricting access via firewall rules or VPN.

Author: ```suggestion
       *Security Tip*:  Ensure your Nagios dashboard is only accessible over a secure connection (HTTPS) and protected by strong credentials. Consider restricting access using firewall rules or VPN. For set up instructions, see [Nagios Core - Configuring SSL/TLS](https://support.nagios.com/kb/article/nagios-core-configuring-ssl-tls-595.html).
```

>     {{< /note >}}

Author: ```suggestion
```

1. Verify Installation

    After confirming the web interface loads at

    - `systemctl status nagios4` to confirm the service is running
    - `tail -n 20 /var/log/nagios4/nagios.log` to check recent activity
    - `nagios4 -v /etc/nagios4/nagios.cfg` to validate config syntax

    A clean output looks like:

        Total Warnings: 0
        Total Errors: 0

    {{< note >}}

>     If you see errors, Nagios will point to the specific file and line number. Fix those before restarting the service.

Author: ```suggestion
    If you see errors, Nagios will point to the specific file and line number. Fix those before restarting the service. See [Nagios Core's official installation guide](https://support.nagios.com/kb/article/nagios-core-installing-nagios-core-from-source-96.html) for deeper context.
```

    {{< /note >}}

## Next Steps

- Explore [Nagios plugins](https://nagios-plugins.org/)
- Configure [email alerts](https://support.nagios.com/kb/article/how-to-configure-email-notifications-in-nagios-xi-1036.html) via mailutils or msmtp
- Set up remote monitoring with [NRPE or SNMP](https://www.thomas-krenn.com/en/wiki/Icinga_NRPE_Plugin_how-to)

> - Consider integrating with [Deploy Prometheus and Grafana through the Linode Marketplace](https://www.linode.com/docs/marketplace-docs/guides/prometheus-grafana/) for visualization

Author: ```suggestion
- Consider integrating with [Deploy Prometheus and Grafana through the Linode Marketplace](https://www.linode.com/docs/marketplace-docs/guides/prometheus-grafana/) for visualization.

{{< note>}}

This is a **parallel monitoring stack**, not a direct Nagios integration.

{{< /note>}}
```

       sudo ufw allow 80/tcp
       sudo ufw allow 443/tcp
       
- If your instance is hosted in a cloud environment (e.g., Linode, AWS, GCP), check the *cloud firewall or security group settings and confirm that these ports are open to the public.

This step is required to access the nagios web interface after installation.

If you are switching from another monitoring system (e.g., Zabbix, Prometheus, Icinga), prior to installation:

- **Stop and disable the previous service**: Use `systemctl stop` and `systemctl disable` to prevent conflicts.
- **Remove conflicting packages**: Check for overlapping plugins or agents that may interfere with Nagios.
- **Clean up legacy configuration files**: Look in `/etc/`, `/usr/local/`, and `/var/log/` for residual files from previous tools.
- **Review firewall and port settings**: Nagios may require different ports than your previous tool (e.g., 5666, 80/443).
- **Backup any relevant data**: If you're migrating alerts or host definitions, preserve what you need before uninstalling.

## System Preparation

> 

Author: ```suggestion

Before installing Nagios, ensure your compute instance is fully online and has received an IPv4 address. This is required for package updates, SSH access, and alert configuration.

```

       sudo ufw allow 80/tcp
       sudo ufw allow 443/tcp
       
- If your instance is hosted in a cloud environment (e.g., Linode, AWS, GCP), check the *cloud firewall or security group settings and confirm that these ports are open to the public.

This step is required to access the nagios web interface after installation.

If you are switching from another monitoring system (e.g., Zabbix, Prometheus, Icinga), prior to installation:

- **Stop and disable the previous service**: Use `systemctl stop` and `systemctl disable` to prevent conflicts.
- **Remove conflicting packages**: Check for overlapping plugins or agents that may interfere with Nagios.
- **Clean up legacy configuration files**: Look in `/etc/`, `/usr/local/`, and `/var/log/` for residual files from previous tools.
- **Review firewall and port settings**: Nagios may require different ports than your previous tool (e.g., 5666, 80/443).
- **Backup any relevant data**: If you're migrating alerts or host definitions, preserve what you need before uninstalling.

## System Preparation

> If this command fails or your SSH connection times out, your instance may have booted without an IPv4address. This is a known edge case in Ubuntu 22.04 cloud images.

Author: ```suggestion
If this command fails or your SSH connection times out, your instance may have booted without an IPv4address. This is a known edge case in Ubuntu 22.04 cloud images. Before installing Nagios, ensure your compute instance is fully online and has received an IPv4 address. This is required for package updates, SSH access, and alert configuration.
```

Update your system:

    sudo apt update && sudo apt upgrade -y

## Create Nagios User and Group

 Creating a dedicated `nagios` user and `nagcmd` user group ensures that Nagios runs securely and can execute commands via the web interface:

    sudo useradd nagios
    sudo groupadd nagcmd

Adding both the `nagios` service user and Apache2 web server user to the `nagcmd` user group makes it possible for Nagios to securely execute commands via the web interface. This step aligns with least-privilege principles--granting only the necessary access for command execution while maintaining separation between service and interface roles:

    sudo usermod -aG nagcmd nagios && sudo usermod -aG nagcmd www-data

## Install Nagios and Plugins

For a simpler install you can use Debian's package manager, [HowtoForge's guide for Debian 12](https://www.howtoforge.com/nagios-debian-12/#google_vignette) which walks you through the APT-based setup, including:
- Installing Nagios and plugins via `apt install`
- Creating the `nagiosadmin` user with Apache Basic Auth
- Verifying the dashboard and service status

> This method doesn't use manual compilation and is ideal for quick deployments. Once installed, return here to configure alerts.

Author: ```suggestion
This method doesn't use manual compilation and is ideal for quick deployments. Once installed, return to [Nagios Alert Setup on Debian 12 and Ubuntu 22.04](guides\uptime\monitoring\monitor-and-configure-nagios-alerts-on-debian-12-ubuntu-22-04\index.md) to configure alerts.
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

 Creating a dedicated `nagios` user and `nagcmd` user group ensures that Nagios runs securely and can execute commands via the web interface:

    sudo useradd nagios
    sudo groupadd nagcmd

Adding both the `nagios` service user and Apache2 web server user to the `nagcmd` user group makes it possible for Nagios to securely execute commands via the web interface. This step aligns with least-privilege principles--granting only the necessary access for command execution while maintaining separation between service and interface roles:

    sudo usermod -aG nagcmd nagios && sudo usermod -aG nagcmd www-data

## Install Nagios and Plugins

For a simpler install you can use Debian's package manager, [HowtoForge's guide for Debian 12](https://www.howtoforge.com/nagios-debian-12/#google_vignette) which walks you through the APT-based setup, including:
- Installing Nagios and plugins via `apt install`
- Creating the `nagiosadmin` user with Apache Basic Auth
- Verifying the dashboard and service status

This method doesn't use manual compilation and is ideal for quick deployments. Once installed, return here to configure alerts.

You can use a one-liner install:

>     sudo apt install nagios4 nagios-plugins-contrib monitoring-plugins nagios-nrpe-plugin -y

Author: ```suggestion
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
### Verify it's running:
    systemctl status nagios
```

    sudo usermod -aG nagcmd nagios && sudo usermod -aG nagcmd www-data

## Install Nagios and Plugins

For a simpler install you can use Debian's package manager, [HowtoForge's guide for Debian 12](https://www.howtoforge.com/nagios-debian-12/#google_vignette) which walks you through the APT-based setup, including:
- Prerequisites
- Installing Nagios on Debian
- Nagios Configuration Files and Directories
- Enable Nagios Authentication
- Setting up Apache Basic Auth for Nagios for Nagios
- Accessing Nagios Installation with Authentication Enabled
- Conclusion
This method doesn't use manual compilation and is ideal for quick deployments. Once installed, return to [Nagios Alert Setup on Debian 12 and Ubuntu 22.04](guides\uptime\monitoring\monitor-and-configure-nagios-alerts-on-debian-12-ubuntu-22-04\index.md) to configure alerts.

### Verify it's running:
    systemctl status nagios
If installation fails or a package isn't found, check the terminal output for clues. Then run:

    apt search nagios

>     

Author: ```suggestion
    
    ### Check Nagios Version
    
    To confirm the installed version:
    
        /usr/sbin/nagios4 --version
        
This validates the correct package was installed and is useful when comparing behavior across environments or debugging version-specific issues.

```

## Install Nagios and Plugins

For a simpler install you can use Debian's package manager, [HowtoForge's guide for Debian 12](https://www.howtoforge.com/nagios-debian-12/#google_vignette) which walks you through the APT-based setup, including:
- Prerequisites
- Installing Nagios on Debian
- Nagios Configuration Files and Directories
- Enable Nagios Authentication
- Setting up Apache Basic Auth for Nagios for Nagios
- Accessing Nagios Installation with Authentication Enabled
- Conclusion
This method doesn't use manual compilation and is ideal for quick deployments. Once installed, return to [Nagios Alert Setup on Debian 12 and Ubuntu 22.04](guides\uptime\monitoring\monitor-and-configure-nagios-alerts-on-debian-12-ubuntu-22-04\index.md) to configure alerts.

### Verify it's running:
    systemctl status nagios
If installation fails or a package isn't found, check the terminal output for clues. Then run:

    apt search nagios
    
 ### Check Nagios Version
    
To confirm the installed version:
    
    /usr/sbin/nagios4 --version
        
This validates the correct package was installed and is useful when comparing behavior across environments or debugging version-specific issues.

> - Missing package: One of the listed packages may not be available in your distro's repositories.

Author: ```suggestion
```

## Install Nagios and Plugins

For a simpler install you can use Debian's package manager, [HowtoForge's guide for Debian 12](https://www.howtoforge.com/nagios-debian-12/#google_vignette) which walks you through the APT-based setup, including:
- Prerequisites
- Installing Nagios on Debian
- Nagios Configuration Files and Directories
- Enable Nagios Authentication
- Setting up Apache Basic Auth for Nagios for Nagios
- Accessing Nagios Installation with Authentication Enabled
- Conclusion
This method doesn't use manual compilation and is ideal for quick deployments. Once installed, return to [Nagios Alert Setup on Debian 12 and Ubuntu 22.04](guides\uptime\monitoring\monitor-and-configure-nagios-alerts-on-debian-12-ubuntu-22-04\index.md) to configure alerts.

### Verify it's running:
    systemctl status nagios
If installation fails or a package isn't found, check the terminal output for clues. Then run:

    apt search nagios
    
 ### Check Nagios Version
    
To confirm the installed version:
    
    /usr/sbin/nagios4 --version
        
This validates the correct package was installed and is useful when comparing behavior across environments or debugging version-specific issues.

> This will confirm whether the required packages are available in your distro's repositories.

Author: ```suggestion
```
